\chapter*{Conclusion}
\addcontentsline{toc}{chapter}{Conclusion}

how has thesis provided better top-down predictive theory for
biodiversity and better integrated evolution into theory?

use of stat mech to make detailed top-down predictions and to
indentify where other mechanisms needed

application of top down modeling to evolutionary process and testing
of top down theory in evolving landscapes to understand how
evolutionary drives deviation from theory

provided software tools to make theory testing more robust and
accessible

what future steps are motivated by the thesis?

\paragraph{Future work: adaptive landscapes and memory.}
Ecological theory has of late been dominated by neutral models
\citep[e.g.][]{rominger2009, rominger2015GEB}. This approach needs
robust alternative hypotheses because a lack of alternative theories
rooted in classical ecology could be one limitation preventing a more
rigorous competition between deterministic and statistical theories of
biodiversity. My work in the fossil record motivates a new approach to
ecological theory using super-statistics to parsimoniously capture the
non-neutrality of species and relate that non-neutrality to the
non-equilibrium process of diversification on an adaptive landscape. I
am also excited by the prospect of exploring what other principles
from statistical physics could help us illuminate mechanisms in
ecology and evolution. Spin glasses, with their non-exponential memory
and non-ergodic dynamics, could be an ideal starting point.

\paragraph{Future work: metabarcoding and ecological theory.}
Combining test of ecological theory with massive phylogenetic data
could determine what aspects of evolutionary history specifically
shape ecological communities, but massive phylogenetic data on the
scale of large ecological studies is limiting.  A new approach
dubbed ``metabarcoding'' \citep{taberlet2012} harnesses next
generation sequencing technology to produce massive amounts of genetic
data for ecological samples. This approach, however, has known
pitfalls but these could be overcome bioinformatically, a challenge
that could make a huge contribution to the field and one which I am
excited to undertake and have been invited to explore by {\it Trends
  in Ecology and Evolution} \citep{romTREE}.